Hello, everyone.
Welcome to today's talk on improving
code quality, velocity, and team
cohesion with peer programming.
I'm Demetria Ramsour, and
I have 20 plus years in the
project management profession.
I joined Red Hat in 2020 as a
technical project manager in the
engineering organization working with.
Product managers and engineering teams
to deliver features and to continuously
improve the way that we work.
In July, 2023, I became an engineering
manager and I currently have six
engineers that develop features
and provide operational support
for one of our managed services.
While working as a technical project
manager and now as an engineering
manager, I've witnessed a push to
have engineers increase velocity
to deliver features faster.
Delivering quality code at accelerated
speeds is challenging for many engineers.
It's even more challenging in
an environment where teams are
distributed, they're working remotely.
It makes collaboration difficult.
So today I want to talk about The Peer
Programming concept that my team is
using to improve co quality, increase
velocity, and improve team cohesion.
My goal is that you'll leave this
presentation with an understanding
of what Peer Programming is, an
understanding of the benefits as well as
the misconceptions of Peer Programming,
and leave with a few tips to get started
on your Peer Programming journey.
Peer programming is an agile
software development technique
where two or more developers
work together to solve a problem.
Developers share ideas in real time
and develop code synchronously.
One of the developers has their hands
on the keyboard and types the code
while explaining their thought process,
and then the other developer watches,
helps to review code, raises any
concerns, and helps to identify errors.
And then the two, uh, Individuals
swap roles periodically
throughout that process.
Pair programming is not a new concept.
It's actually one of the principles
of extreme programming that's
been around since about 1996.
And the tenet within extreme
programming states that two
developers will always work together.
When working on production code.
Now that means that two
developers must always pair
when working on production code.
So ironically, you know, when I went
for new hire training for my very first
job many moons ago, the concept of
extreme programming was introduced to me.
However, I've never worked on a team
or worked with a team that had pair
programming as part of their culture.
So.
In July 2023, after I moved into
the my management position, and I
met with my team, Lee, you know, my
team Lee asked me to support getting
the team to start programming.
So without a doubt, I said yes, because I
was very interested in seeing a technique
and approach that I had heard about.
in action and seeing how my team could
benefit from using this approach.
So I was very happy to promote
and support the idea of pair
programming within my team.
Because pair programming,
it really has many benefits.
And in this section, we'll talk about
four of the key benefits of pair
programming and how those can be.
Achieve those benefits can be achieved
while pair programming and as we
talk about each of these benefits.
I'll also share Comments from my team
about their experience with with pair
programming and What they saw in terms
of each of these benefits, because I did
pull my team after we had, uh, five peer
programming for about four, four months
to get their feedback to see if they were
seeing the outcomes that, you know, I,
I had expected and that the team lead
had expected by them peer programming.
The first.
Item or benefit was increased velocity
and velocity can be increased a
number of ways by pair program.
And one is just getting on block faster.
Not everyone on the team asked
for help when they need help.
That's just simple.
Some people just feel
uncomfortable asking for help.
And so they might spend more time
than they need to trying to figure out
how to solve an issue by themselves
versus just asking somebody for help.
Because we know that sometimes
having that additional set of eyes,
somebody can see things that you
may not see because you're so close.
You know, to the code.
It might be something small
that you're overlooking.
So the idea is that having that second
set of eyes, that additional peering
with somebody, they would help to
see something that you don't see.
You also have the opportunity to
discuss what's being blocked and get a
perspective on how to address that from
the person that you're peering with.
So.
Adopting pair programming for the
team would just make it easier for
the team to discuss any issues that
were blocking them and essentially
help them to accelerate, um, their
ability to complete the work faster.
Another way that Velocity has increased
was just getting code changes approved
faster and with pair programming, there's
two developers working on code together.
That means that there are two individuals,
at least at a minimum, that's fine.
familiar with, with the
changes, with the code.
And that means that one individual
is able to then go and approve
any changes for that code without
spending a lot of time trying to
get, you know, up on the context.
So pair programming helps with that.
Getting code changes
approved faster, getting.
Getting the items approved faster
helps to increase the velocity,
getting the changes in faster.
And third, uh, velocity is increased
by identifying code errors faster
in real time in the pairing session
because there are two people there.
Usually the second person, somebody is
able to identify bugs or typos in the code
or other issues in the code, they could be
identified as part of that peering session
just by having that second set of eyes.
So all of those things will help with
increased velocity and some of the
comments from my team around this too.
that I received is that it just simply,
it saves time, pair programming saves time
and helps you on board those situations
that are unworkable because you're
able having a conversation somebody's
there watching, helping, you're sharing
ideas, you're, you're identifying issues
faster so it saves time and you get
the feedback right there in real time.
Uh, that it helps complete projects faster
when you pair, which is what we expect.
You complete the project faster because
you're pairing, which increases the
velocity, which is what we're looking at.
Another comment received was the
errors or mistakes they get called
sooner, which is definitely one of the
benefits and something that can help
increase the velocity, catching those
errors sooner, getting them addressed.
Another comment that was made was
around the fact that you reduce errors
in debugging time by peering because
there's that second set of eyes there
watching to point out those things.
And lastly, that it's faster development.
You're getting.
Feedback on your PR is faster because
there's one or more individuals in the
pairing session familiar with the code.
You're able to get things approved
faster, but also it's a tighter
feedback loop because everybody, you
know, you're peering with somebody.
So you're getting that feedback
in real time and all of that
helps to increase velocity.
Another benefit of pair programming is
improved code and code can be improved by
the sharing of ideas when you're peering.
There's a person there to
provide different perspectives
on how to address a solution.
And these discussions allow for, again,
those different perspectives, even
better perspectives, um, to be revealed.
And sometimes a perspective or an
approach reveal might be better than
one that you originally had in mind.
Sometimes they can be combined to
make a better, stronger solution.
Um, and when you think about the fact
that coding is more than just coding,
that it really is coming up with
approaches to solving, um, solving
problems, uh, designs to solving
problems, you'll see that the sharing
of ideas really helps in this area.
Code can be improved by
being more efficient as well.
And when you pair, there's
somebody there who.
Might be able to provide a perspective
or insight on how you can write the code
differently to achieve the same outcome.
So that's 1 way that you can
approve code quality is just even
having more efficient, solid code.
that can scale, which can be achieved
by by peer programming, having that
second set of eyes or more people
participating in that peering session
that could provide that input.
And some of the feedback I received from
my team around improved code quality
is that Again, that hearing the, the
different ideas about the solutions that,
that really helped and you can figure
out which one is the best and have a
good solid idea to move forward with.
Other feedback I received was having
that second set of eyes and multiple
perspectives that it really was
helpful in improving that code.
Because it is more ideas.
There's more things to think about
or things you may not have even
thought of that need to be considered
as, uh, as part of the solution.
So that's why it helps to have those
different and varying perspectives.
And then lastly, again, there was a
comment around the ideas that you receive
when you're pairing that they result in
better code and a better code design.
So.
Better code and better design.
So it really my team is really finding
that peering is beneficial to them.
Another benefit of pair programming
is building team cohesion and pair
programming can help with this.
Because when you're appearing, you
have an opportunity to learn about your
teammates with the pairing sessions.
You get to learn about each
other's strengths and weaknesses.
You have an opportunity to see
how your teammate does things,
like what tools do they use?
What commands do they use?
What is their thought process or
reasoning behind the things that they do?
And you might even learn something
that you wouldn't have even thought
to ask because it's so subtle.
So having those peering sessions allow you
to work more closely with the teammate.
It allows you to get more
comfortable, you know, helping
each other and working together.
So we saw peer programming as a
way to really build relationships
amongst the team, which will
help build that team cohesion.
Peering also helps the
team feel more comfortable.
So you have opportunities for the team to
peer and work together on the same ethic.
And that's, that was one of
the, our same feature, that was
one of the things that we did.
But it, you can set things up.
In appearing so that the whole team is
able to collaborate together on a feature.
So the whole team is connected because
they all contributed, hopefully,
to the success of a feature.
And everyone has a understanding of
end to end of how this feature works.
So, it helps the team feel more
connected by appearing and even though.
usually with peering is two individuals
working together on a topic.
Other members of the team can join in.
They can join in to be, you know,
active participants or to just listen.
And even with listening, though, they're
learning and understanding thought
processes and how to better problem
solve by listening to the conversation.
So it's an opportunity to to
learn and grow by peering.
And
Some of the comments around team,
team cohesion that my team made was
that it just brings the team closer,
which really helps because it, the
comment here is that it remote working
environment can make people feel isolated.
So parent really helps
bring the team together.
Like they're working in
a virtual environment.
Office.
That's a wonderful benefit
of pair programming.
Another comment on the same vein
is that that whole team working
together was was really big.
They, the pairs of more have dedicated
meetings set up working on specific tasks.
But this really helps to
build the team cohesion.
And lastly,
just collaborating with the
teammates in general helps
bring the team closer together.
The last benefit is really like
a software programming as a way
of, uh, excuse me for a second
need to drink water,
but we saw it as a mentoring
opportunity, and I encourage my senior
members of the team to invite others
to pair with them as they worked on
items so that they could share their
welcome knowledge and experience.
So.
I ask my senior members to not only
invite people to share with them,
but also ask other people if there's
something that they want to peer on.
Because oftentimes, some people might
be a little shy about saying that they
need help, but if somebody asks them
if they want to peer on something,
More than likely, they'll say yes, and
some of the comments that I received
from my team around this is just,
you know, caring saves learning time.
It results in better quality
and knowledge and experience.
So mentoring, sharing of ideas
helps you keep the ego in check.
You realize you don't know
everything that there's something
to be learned from everybody.
There are different perspectives and
ideas by sharing, and you just can
improve your problem solving skills
enhanced by just working together.
All wonderful benefits
of peer programming.
Now, there are misconceptions,
too, that might make people a
little reluctant to peer program.
And I'd like to talk
about four misconceptions.
No time to help others slows you down.
No feeling of accomplishment.
And some people just see that it might
not be helpful due to mismatch skills.
But all of these really
are misconceptions.
And while my team is using pair
programming and they want to
move forward, kind of formalizing
some of our processes around it.
To ensure that the whole team
continues to pair program.
Now they have their own hesitation before
trying it and experiencing the benefits.
So let's talk about each one of these
and I'll share some, some of the
specific misconceptions from my team.
And I guess that the first one was
just feeling that people really
don't have time to work with you.
Specifically, everyone has
their own project to work on.
So with their own projects,
they have their own deadlines.
So the feeling is that people
will be less likely to help.
Also, there's a large feeling that No
one wants to tie up another engineer
for long stretches of time again because
people have work that they need to do.
They have other priorities, but while
this might make people reluctant to
try a pair programming, the thought
that people don't have time to help.
And when reality people
do have time to help.
If you.
ask somebody to help, they will help.
Never have I ever asked somebody for help
and they not help me and never has someone
asked me for help and I didn't help them.
So it's truly a misconception and
it might just, you know, be people
just are reluctant to ask for help.
It kind of goes back to that.
You know, they don't want to ask
to help because they don't, they
don't want to bother and keep
people from doing other things.
But Reality is people will help.
So that is a misconception.
It has to be overcome.
Another misconception is the
feeling that You'll be slowed down.
So specific comments from my team
around this is that working in
peers would just slow down their
progress in their development speed.
Another engineer commented that, you
know, it's just going to take a bit of
time to give somebody the context that
they need to be able to contribute.
And this could take a long time.
Well, we know that while there
are misconceptions that peering
might slow you down, in reality,
it helps increase velocity and
improve, you know, code quality.
So it really is something that you have
to experience to see how it works and
that this really is a misconception that
just might impact your ability to try it.
But once you try it, you'll see
that it really is a misconception.
Accomplishments, um, feelings around
accomplishments was really about that,
that sense of accomplishment that you get
from solving the problem yourself that
you won't get that for pair programming.
So that might make people reluctant
to try it or this other comment that
my engineer, one of my engineers made
about, you know, their own abilities.
They want to prove that they
can do it themselves and
make their own achievements.
And actually, they're just a little
reluctant to ask for help, too.
But we know that when someone pairs
with you to help you get unblocked
or complete your goal or reach
your goal, you're happy about that.
If somebody asks you for help and
you help unblock them and help that
individual reach their goal, there's
something that, you know, you feel
a sense of pride in the fact that
you contributed and you helped them.
And when the whole team works
together to solve a problem and.
They feel good about that.
So there is a sense of accomplishment
that comes by completing tasks as
a pair or as a group or enabling
somebody to be successful.
There's a big feeling of
accomplishment in that.
So, um, so this is a misconception again,
something you have to try, um, and see.
That that you'll feel differently
once once you pair and lastly is this
idea of mismatch skills and one of
the comments from my engineers is that
they worry about being judged or not
being able to contribute equally well
the whole point of pair programming
is to get a different perspective or
diverse perspectives on things so you
people will have varying skills it's
not meant for everybody to be the same
you know you learn by your differences.
Another comment around this
was that, oh, peering could
lead to conflicts in working.
And people have different working
and coding styles, which might make
you a little reluctant to reach out.
I don't know how they work,
but that's part of the point.
Reaching out, working together,
learning from each other.
Another engineer commented that one
thing that might make them reluctant
is just their lack of self confidence
in their own programming skills,
which they didn't mention that pair
programming kind of helps with that.
So that's the whole point that with
peer programming is that you do
peer with somebody who may have a
different perspective, a diverse
background, a different thoughts
on things, but coming together, you
know, two are stronger than one.
So that's the whole point.
that pair programming.
Once you try it, you overcome
these misconceptions and
misconceptions are normal.
I'll say that again.
My team at the misconceptions too.
But after they gave pair program
in a try, they gave it a chance
and they discovered his advantages.
So they realized that pair
programming really can improve
quality through continuous review.
Uh, you know, getting PRs reviewed
faster, reducing bugs to real time
error identification and then just
being able to facilitate knowledge
sharing amongst the team members.
So they also understood and what they,
uh, understood from pair program is
that it could alleviate that feeling
of isolation that, that some developers
experience when they're working along.
So there's a lot to be gained by
overcoming the misconceptions.
Well, now that we've covered the
benefits of pair programming and
looked at the misconceptions,
I want to share with you kind of how
my team kind of got started in pair
programming and leave you with some
tips and things to think about as you
consider your pair programming journey.
The first item is tools.
You have need to have a tool that allow
you to screen share and also a place
where everybody can see the cold cold.
So in terms of tools, my team
use Google me, they use Google
me to share their screen.
Um, and then all the code
within a common repository.
That was simply that was it.
Nothing fancy.
And then in terms of guidance, the only
guidance that my team was given was this
to switch roles periodically, such that
the driver becomes a navigator and the
navigator becomes the driver that they
try to limit peer programming sessions and
keep them to under, you know, two hours.
I mean, definitely they could go
longer or shorter, but that was
the guidance that was providing
in terms of stakeholder support.
Now, this is recommended, especially if
this is you want to try pair programming
in a team or organization, because you
want somebody to help promote the idea of
peer programming, um, amongst everybody
and, um, I was a stakeholder for my
team, and I was very much a supporter,
and every opportunity that I had in
all the correspondences with my team, I
highly encouraged that they try out Peer
Programming if they had not tried it.
And whenever they mentioned that they
had an issue, I always recommended that
they get that second set of eyes, hint,
hint, Peer Program, to Peer Program.
Get on block to move that work faster
because I knew some members of my
team were a bit hesitant to ask
questions when they were blocked.
So I definitely encouraged and
always recommended that they try to
pair programming to get on block.
So that's what the
stakeholder support would do.
Just to help, you know, promote the idea.
Uh, amongst the individuals that you
want to try pair programming with.
Um, next is having a pair
programming champion.
We found this to be helpful because
it's that pair programming champion
that would help also promote the
idea, but also set an example for
what pair programming will look like.
For my team, it was a team lead.
Team lead would invite people to pair.
but also would ask people
if they wanted to pair.
So by doing this, the team members
were able to experience parent,
but also were able to start
to see the benefits of parent.
My team lead even went as far as
to set up a calendar for people to
schedule time to pair with available
parents slots to encourage them
to reach out to ask questions.
So.
He the team really set the example
and show people what it looked
like, but also help the team members
start to experience the benefits.
And once they saw the
benefits and overcame their,
um,
yeah, once they saw the benefits,
they wanted to move forward.
Once they overcame those misconceptions,
it was something they wanted to do
more of, which led us to experimenting
because once they saw it, we were
trying to figure out how best to get
people to more do pair programming.
So we tried a few things.
One was one sprint.
We assigned two people to a
task to each task that we had
and had them pair together.
Um, for a couple of
sprints, we assigned a task.
An act told everyone that
you need to peer with someone
during that sprint on that task.
And then we've also tried where we
did whole team peering, which is an
approach that the team really liked
where they all work together on a
feature and we had pairs of more, they
had dedicated sets of meetings to work
on specific tasks with one driver and
one or more people there to discuss.
So they really like that approach.
But it's about experimenting and
seeing what works best for your team.
And then continuously improve, because
once you start to see what works,
then you, you want to iterate on
that process and further refine the
things that work best for the team.
Um, my team wants to kind of formalize
more how we do our pair programming.
They really want to ensure that
we are being real, uh, proactive
about making sure we do more
whole team pair programming.
It was something that they
really, really like to do.
So you continuously improve based
on the feedback from your team.
And then lastly, it's the team culture.
People need to be comfortable sharing
ideas and not be judged based on
their comments and their feedback.
So it's really important to have a
blameless culture when you're doing
peer programming, if you want it
to be successful, because people,
they need to know it's okay to fail.
They need everybody to
assume positive intent.
Everyone needs to extend trust and You
know, everyone needs to communicate,
so you definitely want people to
feel comfortable pairing and sharing.
As I conclude this talk and as you
contemplate the use of pair programming in
your organization, I'd like to just share
a few final points for your consideration.
One, pair programming has numerous
benefits as discussed today, but the only
way for you to realize those benefits
and to see them It's to try it to.
There's no one size fits all
when it comes to pair program.
It really is about what works
for the individuals for the
team or for the organization.
So it's really about trying different
approaches and determining what's best.
And lastly, just do it.
Just try it out.
Experiment to see what works and what
can be changed to make it better.
Pair programming is an
iterative process and it takes
practice like everything else.
So, the sooner you try pair
programming, the sooner you, your
team, your organization will start
benefiting from applying this practice.
Here are some references with
additional information about the
benefits and misconceptions of pair
programming that was discussed today.
Um, and I'm going to share some of
my thoughts during today's talk.
If you have questions, feel
free to reach out to me.
And I must say, I want to take a moment
to acknowledge my team and say thank you.
Thank you to my team who, who made
it possible for me to share our
pair programming journey with you.
And lastly, I want to thank
you all for joining me today.
Thank you.